[Documentation] create plugin example (#3)
alumet-dev/developer-book: src/chapter_1.md

├── alumet-config.toml
├── alumet-output.csv
├── app-agent/
├── app-relay-collector/
├── plugin-csv/
├── plugin-influxdb/
├── plugin-nvidia/
├── plugin-oar2/
├── plugin-perf/
├── plugin-rapl/
├── plugin-relay/
├── plugin-socket-control/
├── target/
├── test-dynamic-plugin-c/
├── test-dynamic-plugin-rust/
└── test-dynamic-plugins/
```

So let's create our plugin using:

```bash
cargo init --lib my-plugin
```

Now, go to the Cargo.toml at the root and you should see this new library:

```toml
members = [
    "alumet",
    "my-plugin",
]
```

Now, you can fulfil the TOML of the newly created library with data you want. For example:

```toml
[package]
name = "my-plugin"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[dependencies]
alumet = { path = "../alumet" }
```

### Implement MyPlugin

Let's go to the newly created folder containing the new library. We will use the lib.rs file.

To define our plugin, we need to create a Rust structure: **MyPlugin**. This structure will contain all necessary for the plugin to work.
Let's take an easy structure having 2 fields: config and metrics. Config will contain the configuration of the plugin and metrics which
will contain all related metrics.

```rust 

> {{#rustdoc_include plugin_example.rs:MyPlugin_Struct}}

Reviewer: `rustdoc_include` includes the whole file but only reveals a subset of it. It means that the entire content will be duplicated in the markdown file, and tested multiple times. Is it intended? Wouldn't it be better to use regular `include`?

Author: using include, i get the following:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f148b73d-f496-4a13-ba15-49513bea87ec)

Reviewer: Ah, okey. Is it possible to add a flag to the code blocks to avoid the file to be run multiple times, then? `rust,ignore` maybe?

Author: I will look for, but currently, I don't know

Let's do it:

```rust,ignore
{{#rustdoc_include ../code/plugin_example.rs:impl_default_config}}
```

The default value of poll_interval is a duration of 1 second.

### Implement AlumetPlugin

First, let's create a MyPluginSource struct:

```rust,ignore
{{#rustdoc_include ../code/plugin_example.rs:MyPluginSource}}
```

We have a structure: **MyPlugin** let's implement the `AlumetPlugin` trait, this will transform our structure in an Alumet plugin
defining some functions:

- name()
- version()
- init()
- default_config()
- start()
- stop()

Let's define these for our plugin:

```rust,ignore
{{#rustdoc_include ../code/plugin_example.rs:implAlumetPlugin}}
```

Let's focus on the start function.
We want to create a new metric to match with the Metrics structure's field. In this structure, we have one field: *a_metric*.
First, we create a unit associated with the metric:

```rust,ignore
{{#rustdoc_include ../code/plugin_example.rs:createPrefixedUnit}}
```

Then, we use the create_metric() function of the alumet::plugin::AlumetStart. We specify the kind of value (u64), the name

> of the metric, its unit (created above) and the last argument is the description:

Reviewer: Now that you no longer create the `PrefixedUnit` explicitely (which is good), you need to update the description ^^

# Chapter 1

## Create an Alumet plugin step by step

The best way to get a good understanding of how Alumet's Plugin works is to do it yourself. So this chapter will create an input plugin, which
read a random byte from a file.

### Create the plugin

In order to create the plugin, we need to initialize a new library. So first, go to the root directory of Alumet. You should have different
folders containing the different plugins:

```bash
.
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── LICENSE
├── LICENSE.fr.txt
├── README.md
├── alumet/
├── alumet-api-dynamic/
├── alumet-api-macros/
├── alumet-config.toml
├── alumet-output.csv
├── app-agent/
├── app-relay-collector/
├── plugin-csv/
├── plugin-influxdb/
├── plugin-nvidia/
├── plugin-oar2/
├── plugin-perf/
├── plugin-rapl/
├── plugin-relay/
├── plugin-socket-control/
├── target/
├── test-dynamic-plugin-c/
├── test-dynamic-plugin-rust/
└── test-dynamic-plugins/
```

So let's create our plugin using:

```bash
cargo init --lib my-plugin
```

Now, go to the Cargo.toml at the root and you should see this new library:

```toml
[...]
members = [
    "alumet",

>     [...]

Reviewer 2: Can you remove this ... which transform the files changed section in an awful red file ?

    "my-plugin",
]
```

Now, you can fulfil the TOML of the newly created library with data you want. For example:

```toml
[package]
name = "my-plugin"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[dependencies]
alumet = { path = "../alumet" }

> ...

Reviewer 2: Same question for this ...

# Chapter 1

## Create an ALUMet plugin step by step

The best way to get a good understanding of how ALUMet's Plugin works is to do it yourself. So this chapter will create an input plugin, which
read a random byte from a file.

### Create the plugin

In order to create the plugin, we need to initialize a new library. So first, go to the root directory of ALUMet. You should have different
folders containing the different plugins:

```bash
.
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── LICENSE
├── LICENSE.fr.txt
├── README.md
├── alumet
├── alumet-api-dynamic
├── alumet-api-macros
├── alumet-config.toml
├── alumet-output.csv
├── app-agent
├── app-relay-collector
├── plugin-csv
├── plugin-influxdb
├── plugin-nvidia
├── plugin-oar2
├── plugin-perf
├── plugin-rapl
├── plugin-relay
├── plugin-socket-control
├── target
├── test-dynamic-plugin-c
├── test-dynamic-plugin-rust

> └── test-dynamic-plugins

Reviewer 2: The difference between directories and files is not that clear

```

So let's create our plugin using:

```bash
cargo init --lib my-plugin
```

Now, go to the Cargo.toml at the root, and you should see this new library:

```toml
[...]
members = [
    "alumet",
    [...]
    "my-plugin",
]
```

Now, you can fulfil the TOML of the newly created library with data you want. For example:

```toml
[package]
name = "my-plugin"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[dependencies]
alumet = { path = "../alumet" }
...
```

### Implement ThePlugin

Let's go to the newly created folder containing the new library. We will use the lib.rs file.

To define our plugin, we need to create a Rust structure: **ThePlugin**. This structure will contain all necessary for the plugin to work.
Let's take an easy structure having 2 fields: config and metrics. Config will contain the configuration of the plugin and metrics which
will contain all related metrics.

> ```rust,ignore

Reviewer 2: Why is there an ignore ?

Author: Because I don't want to rewrite all code each time

Reviewer 2: Do you agree with him @TheElectronWill ?

Reviewer: Putting the file somewhere else and including it there would solve the problem without skipping tests, IMO this would be much better.

> pub struct ThePlugin {

Reviewer 2: Why not using MyPlugin ?

Author: Because this is ThePlugin not mine

Reviewer 2: What is ThePlugin ?

Author: This is the plugin used as an example

Reviewer 2: But I don't understand why we can have a package named "my-plugin" but not a plugin named "MyPlugin". It doesn't make any sense.
Also it feels weird to talk about `ThePlugin`

Author: This is my example, the plugin's name is not the package name

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/alumet-dev/alumet/blob/main/plugin-k8s/src/lib.rs#L41

Author: in this example, the package name is plugin_k8s but the plugin's name is k8s. The structure is K8sPlugin so this is like this example

Reviewer: proposal:
- crate name `plugin-example`
- structure name `ExamplePlugin`

    config: Config,
    metrics: Option<Metrics>,
}
```

Let's define the Metrics structure:

```rust,ignore
pub struct Metrics {
    a_metric: TypedMetricId<u64>,
}
```

> For now, the Metrics structure only contains field: *a_metric*. This is a TypedMetricId, and its type is an *u64*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For now, the Metrics structure only contains field: *a_metric*. This is a TypedMetricId and its type is an *u64*
```

### Implement Config

As you can see, ThePlugin contains a Config value. This Config is a structure where you can define value of configuration for the plugin.
Let's define it:

```rust,ignore
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
struct Config {
    #[serde(with = "humantime_serde")]
    poll_interval: Duration,
}
```

> The poll_interval will be the time waited before two measurements. Feel free to add new element in the configuration if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The poll_interval will be the time between two measurements. Feel free to add new element in the configuration if needed.
```

> For ALUMet a Configuration structure needs to implement the **Default** trait, which define the default value if not modified by the user.

Reviewer 2: It's more readable if you use `` instead of ****
```suggestion
For ALUMet a Configuration structure needs to implement the `Default` trait, which define the default value if not modified by the user.
```

Let's do it:

```rust,ignore
impl Default for Config {
    fn default() -> Self {
        Self {
            poll_interval: Duration::from_secs(1),
        }
    }
}
```

> We have defined a duration for poll_interval at 1 second.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default value of poll_interval is a duration of 1 second.
```

### Implement AlumetPlugin

> First, let's create a ThePluginSource struct:

Reviewer 2: What's with this name ? 😆

```rust,ignore
#[derive(Debug)]
struct ThePluginSource {
    random_byte: TypedMetricId<u64>,
}
```

> We have a structure: **ThePlugin** let's implement the **AlumetPlugin** trait, this will transform our structure in a ALUMet plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have a structure: **ThePlugin** let's implement the `AlumetPlugin` trait, this will transform our structure in an ALUMet plugin
```

defining some functions:

- fn name()
- fn version()
- fn init()
- fn default_config()
- fn start()

> - fn stop()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- name()
- version()
- init()
- default_config()
- start()
- stop()
```

Let's define these for our plugin:

```rust,ignore
impl AlumetPlugin for ThePlugin {
    fn name() -> &'static str {
        "ThePlugin"
    }

    fn version() -> &'static str {
        env!("CARGO_PKG_VERSION")
    }

    fn default_config() -> anyhow::Result<Option<ConfigTable>> {
        Ok(Some(serialize_config(Config::default())?))
    }

    fn init(config: ConfigTable) -> anyhow::Result<Box<Self>> {
        let config = deserialize_config(config)?;
        Ok(Box::new(ThePlugin { config, metrics: None }))
        
    }

    fn start(&mut self, alumet: &mut alumet::plugin::AlumetStart) -> anyhow::Result<()> {
        ...
    }

    fn stop(&mut self) -> anyhow::Result<()> {
        Ok(())
    }
}
```

So we define the name of the plugin, it's version, we use the default config by default and on initialization, we deserialize the config to
take in count if there is a different config than the default one. The start function is here to register metrics, sources and output

> and the stop function is called after all the metrics, sources and output previously registered have been stopped and unregistered.

Reviewer 2: You can put these lines as comments in the code above

> As you can see, currently, we didn't fulfil the start function, let's focus on it now.

Reviewer 2: I don't think you can use fulfil that way

```suggestion
As you can see, currently the start function is empty, let's fill it now.
```

> We want to create a new metrics to match with the Metrics structure's field. In this structure, we have one field: *a_metric*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to create a new metric to match with the `Metrics` structure's field. In this structure, we have one field: *a_metric*.
```

First, we create a unit associated with the metric:

```rust,ignore
let my_byte_unit: PrefixedUnit = PrefixedUnit { base_unit: Unit::Byte, prefix: UnitPrefix::Plain };
```

Then, we use the create_metric() function of the alumet::plugin::AlumetStart. We specify the kind of value (u64), the name

> of the metric, it's unit (created above), and the last argument is the description:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the metric, its unit (created above) and the last argument is the description:
```

```rust,ignore
let byte_metric = alumet.create_metric::<u64>(
        "random_byte",
        my_byte_unit,
        "Byte randomly get",
    )?;
self.metrics = Some(Metrics {
    a_metric: byte_metric
});
```

> Now we have our metric, we need to add a Source to Alumet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have our metric, we need to add a Source to Alumet.
```

Author: hat ? that ?

Reviewer 2: 🎩

The ThePluginSource structure will be used as a buffer to retrieve values. We need to add this as ALUMet source:

```rust,ignore
let initial_source = Box::new(ThePluginSource {
    random_byte: (self.metrics.expect("Can't read byte_metric")).a_metric,
});

alumet.add_source(initial_source, TriggerSpec::at_interval(self.config.poll_interval));
```

In the code above, first, we create a source from ThePluginSource structure, and then we add it to the alumet sources, adding the poll_interval

> value previously defined in the config.

Reviewer 2: Why don't you use comments ?

Currently, you should have an error about your initial source, it's because the trait bound

> **ThePluginSource: alumet::pipeline::Source** is not satisfied. Go to implement source to satisfy it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ThePluginSource: alumet::pipeline::Source` is not satisfied. We are now going to implement `Source` to fix this.
```

### Implement Source

In this part, we will implement the Source trait for our ThePluginSource structure.

```rust,ignore
impl Source for ThePluginSource {
    fn poll(&mut self, measurements: &mut MeasurementAccumulator, timestamp: Timestamp) -> Result<(), PollError> {
        ...
        Ok(())
    }
}
```

This function is called by Alumet each time a measure is needed, so it's in this function that we need to retrieve the value.
For this example, let's read data from the **/dev/urandom** file.
Here is the code:

```rust,ignore
let mut rng = File::open("/dev/urandom")?; // Open the "/dev/urandom" file to obtain random data

let mut buffer = [0u8; 8]; // Create a mutable buffer of type [u8; 8] (an array of 8 unsigned 8-bit integer)
rng.read_exact(&mut buffer)?; // Read enough byte from the file and store the value in the buffer
let value: u64 = u64::from_le_bytes(buffer);
```

> N.b. This will only work on UNIX like OS which does have a file at "/dev/urandom"

We are now able to get the value. The next step is to send this value to ALUMet.
In order to push data to alumet, we first need to create a measurement point and then push it to the MeasurementAccumulator.

> I also add as an example an attribute the same as value but divided by 2 :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I also add as an example an attribute the same as value but divided by 2:
```

```rust,ignore
let my_meas_pt = MeasurementPoint::new(
    timestamp,
    self.random_byte,
    Resource::LocalMachine,
    ResourceConsumer::LocalMachine,
    value,
).with_attr("divided", value.div_euclid(2));
measurements.push(my_meas_pt);
```

### Add to the app-agent

> To add to the app-agent and so use the plugin, several steps are needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the plugin, we need to add it to the app-agent. To do so, several steps are needed.
```

#### Add the plugin to the cargo.toml

It's very easy, just add your plugin library with a matching version in the toml file:

```toml

> ...
> [dependencies]
> ...
> my-plugin = {version= "0.1.0", path = "../my-plugin"}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[dependencies]
my-plugin = {version= "0.1.0", path = "../my-plugin"}
```

Reviewer 2: Or by running 

```bash
cargo add my-plugin --path ../my-plugin 
```

```

#### Import in the app-agent

In the app-agent main file, import using use:

```rust,ignore
use my_plugin::ThePlugin;
```

And then add this newly imported plugin to the statics_plugins macro:

```rust,ignore
let plugins = static_plugins![ThePlugin, CsvPlugin, SocketControlPlugin];
```

In this example, we have 3 plugins used by the app-agent:

- ThePlugin
- CsvPlugin
- SocketControlPlugin

You can now build ALUMet.

> ## Final code

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's a good idea to have everything in the same file

Reviewer 2: And also I don't know if it's really useful to give the full final code

Author: only one example, if i start spliting the code, the user will be lost

Reviewer 2: He won't be lost, but he will push a file with 2000 lines and that's horrible. Every plugins we've written since the beginning are split in multiple files

Reviewer 2: Also, can't you use https://rust-lang.github.io/mdBook/format/mdbook.html#including-portions-of-a-file and https://rust-lang.github.io/mdBook/format/mdbook.html#including-files? This will allow you to write the code in lib.rs and input.rs and then embed some parts inside the doc

Reviewer 2: "you will often wrap the command with ``` to display the file contents without interpreting them"

Author: Here, there are 100 lines of code, explained before, split is not necessary. If there is a PR of 2000 lines, just ask to split

Reviewer 2: Even if there are only 100 lines of code, it may be good to give at the beginning the good practices and a real skeleton of the code the beginner should write

Author: Here there are only 2 major trait implementations, 4 little structures, there is nothing to split

Reviewer: summary of the discussion we've had during the coffee break:
- keep it in one file
- at the end of the tutorial, explain that it's usually best to use another file for the source because it grows in size, and show an example of code of how to do that (using colored diffs would be awesome to highlight the changes!)

Reviewer: IIRC this is what the rustbook does :)

    random_byte: TypedMetricId<u64>,
}

impl AlumetPlugin for ThePlugin {
    fn name() -> &'static str {
        "ThePlugin"
    }

    fn version() -> &'static str {
        env!("CARGO_PKG_VERSION")
    }

    fn default_config() -> anyhow::Result<Option<ConfigTable>> {
        Ok(Some(serialize_config(Config::default())?))
    }

    fn init(config: ConfigTable) -> anyhow::Result<Box<Self>> {
        let config = deserialize_config(config)?;
        Ok(Box::new(ThePlugin { config, metrics: None }))
    }

    fn start(&mut self, alumet: &mut alumet::plugin::AlumetStart) -> anyhow::Result<()> {
        let my_byte_unit: PrefixedUnit = PrefixedUnit {
            base_unit: Unit::Byte,
            prefix: UnitPrefix::Plain,
        };

        let byte_metric = alumet.create_metric::<u64>("random_byte", my_byte_unit, "Byte randomly get")?;
        self.metrics = Some(Metrics { a_metric: byte_metric });

        let initial_source = Box::new(ThePluginSource {
            random_byte: (self.metrics.as_ref().expect("Can't read byte_metric")).a_metric,
        });

        alumet.add_source(initial_source, TriggerSpec::at_interval(self.config.poll_interval));
        Ok(())

>     }

Reviewer 2: You can give this final code at the end of "Implement AlumetPlugin"

Author: I prefer to differentiate the AlumetPlugin part from all the others parts

Reviewer 2: Do you know that you're implementing this function in the chapter "Implement AlumetPlugin" ?

Author: Yes, the first is when the tutorial do it step by step. The second time is all the code to get the full example

Reviewer 2: But the full example is in the tutorial step by step with a todo! in start(), and then you explained what to write in start(). It may be better to put the result of the step by step guide a the end of this tutorial. As a beginner I do not want to read everything in the tutorial before finding what I'm looking for

    fn stop(&mut self) -> anyhow::Result<()> {
        Ok(())
    }
}

impl Source for ThePluginSource {
    fn poll(&mut self, measurements: &mut MeasurementAccumulator, timestamp: Timestamp) -> Result<(), PollError> {
        let mut rng = File::open("/dev/urandom")?; // Open the "/dev/urandom" file to obtain random data

        let mut buffer = [0u8; 8]; // Create a mutable buffer of type [u8; 8] (an array of 8 unsigned 8-bit integer)
        rng.read_exact(&mut buffer)?; // Read enough byte from the file and store the value in the buffer
        let value = u64::from_le_bytes(buffer);

        // Print the value of the first byte in the buffer

>         println!("Random u8: {}", buffer[0]);

Reviewer 2: You keep adding println even in the examples?

        let my_meas_pt = MeasurementPoint::new(
            timestamp,
            self.random_byte,
            Resource::LocalMachine,
            ResourceConsumer::LocalMachine,
            value,
        )
        .with_attr("double", value.div_euclid(2));
        measurements.push(my_meas_pt);

        Ok(())

>     }

Reviewer 2: You can give this final code at the end of the implementation of poll

Author: https://github.com/alumet-dev/developer-book/pull/3#discussion_r1696819867

Reviewer 2: That's not an answer

Author: Done, write two times now

Reviewer 2: Yes, and I answered twice

# Chapter 1

> ## Create an ALUMet plugin step by step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create an Alumet plugin step by step
```
I prefer to write "ALUMET" or, better, "Alumet" :)

alumet.add_source(initial_source, TriggerSpec::at_interval(self.config.poll_interval));
```

Currently, you should have an error about your initial source, it's because the trait bound
`ThePluginSource: alumet::pipeline::Source` is not satisfied. We are now going to implement `Source` to fix this.

### Implement Source

In this part, we will implement the Source trait for our ThePluginSource structure.

```rust
# extern crate serde;
# extern crate humantime_serde;
# extern crate anyhow;
# extern crate alumet;
# use alumet::{
#     measurement::{MeasurementAccumulator, MeasurementPoint, Timestamp},
#     metrics::TypedMetricId,
#     pipeline::{elements::error::PollError, trigger::TriggerSpec, Source},
#     plugin::{
#         rust::{deserialize_config, serialize_config, AlumetPlugin},
#         ConfigTable,
#     },
#     resources::{Resource, ResourceConsumer},
#     units::{PrefixedUnit, Unit, UnitPrefix},
# };
# use serde::{Deserialize, Serialize};
# use std::{fs::File, io::Read, time::Duration};
# 
#[derive(Debug)]
# struct ThePluginSource {
#     random_byte: TypedMetricId<u64>,

> # }

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/alumet-dev/developer-book/pull/3/files#r1696843603

Author: this is not a part of file. This is the code
